# What makes for a good frontend development experience (my opinions)

- Simple > Complex. The goal here is to reduce the size and complexity of the black-box code. Any framework/library code deemed necessary should be easily readable and as small in scope as possible. (It's great when things "just work", but _when_ they don't its important to be able to read and understand the execution paths)
  - Help fight the [complexity demon](https://grugbrain.dev/)
- Readable > Performant. Thats not to say that performance is unimportant. Just that you should only optimize something when its identified as a need, as opposed to the framework attempting to optimize everything all the time while sacrificing transparency and readability. If you just need to build a thing that does its one thing well and never changes than just build a bespoke solution because no library/framework is going to make all the right decisions for every use-case. In my experience, especially with frontend; requirements grow and change, new use-cases arise and old ones die off, libraries change or die, standards change. Its this reason that readability is paramount, you or collaborators will end up reading and tweaking that code many times in the future. Heres some [more reading](https://max.engineer/maintainable-code) for those that are interested.
- A webpage is typically described by 3 languages; HTML, CSS, and JS. However, in my experience, the unit of measure one cares about during app development is the result of combining all 3 to describe the logical pieces of your app, your "components".
- While the HTML markup of the page is a largely unavoidable fact, I don't believe that a markup language is the right tool for the job of describing all 3 major pieces of a component; structure, style, behavior. I also really don't care for the pattern JSX brings to JS as a solution for combining the structure and behavior pieces.. That plus the fact that any complex enough requirement will require scripting anyways, makes my think that using javascript as the main interface makes the most sense.
- Scoped styles are integral to any component based structure. But global and shared styles in the traditional sense are also necessary for wholistic app development and coving edge-cases (One example: Sometimes requirements mean we need to work with things that are not entirely within our control). ShadowDOM solutions make scenarios like these difficult and verbose to navigate. Maybe one day that will improve, but for the time being I feel the ShadowDOM is an unnecessary complication for most use-cases.
- Styling components should be easy, its a huge piece. Browser prefixes should be automatic. I quite like parts of what the styled-components/emotion type patterns offer, and I've really been enjoying postCSS.
- Direct DOM manipulation is more performant and directly understandable than a blind* re-render cycle for every state change. (*blind: Either the framework is blindly re-rendering everything every time, or the decisions its making of what to re-render and what to leave alone are difficult to grasp and debug
- Its helpful to have live individual component "playgrounds" when building out features or components. Storybook does this fairly well, but feels a bit overkill.
- Maybe already obvious, but I strongly believe that the [Locality of Behavior principal](https://htmx.org/essays/locality-of-behaviour/) is key to maintainable & scalable components (and therefore apps). I believe the entire concept of components echos this principal, but some of the other patterns that exemplify this are; css in js, tests & docs alongside their implementations, sub-components directly nested within parent components.
